Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11
 

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect	

	Teaching and Teacher Education	
 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tate
 
How may teacher evaluation have an	impact on professional	

development? A multilevel analysis		
 
Eva Delvaux a,  , Jan Vanhoof a,                      b,                   b,                 b,
*                                Melissa Tuytens   Eva Vekeman   Geert Devos
Peter Van Petegem a
 
a Institute of Education and Information Science, University of Antwerp, Venusstraat 35, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium
b Department of Educational Studies, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
 
highlights
 
  The effect of the evaluation system on professional development is limited.
  Teachers with limited teacher experience report more effects.
  The usefulness of the feedback is a crucial factor.
  Instructional leadership and professional development are positively related.
  A positive attitude of the principal is also important.
 
article info	abstract
 

 
Article history:	Teacher evaluation systems play an important role in teachers’ professional development. This study
Received 9 October 2012	
	examines which components of an evaluation system are related to the effects of the evaluation system
Received in revised form	
	on professional development from a teachers’ perspective. Components such as leadership characteris-
21 June 2013	
	tics, the purpose of evaluation and features of the evaluation system are included in the study. Data
Accepted 24 June 2013	
	regarding a representative sample of 1983 teachers from 65 Flemish schools were collected by ques-
	tionnaire. The outcomes of multilevel analyses suggest that limited experience (<5 years) and useful
Keywords:	
	feedback  are  positively  related  to  outcomes  of  the  teacher  evaluation  system  on  professional
Teacher evaluation	
	development.
Professional development	
	  2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Feedback	
Teacher reaction	
Multilevel analysis	
Teacher appraisal	
 

 
1.  Introduction
Many countries have implemented teacher evaluation systems in order to improve teaching (e.g. Portugal, New Zealand, USA). However, teacher evaluation systems worldwide show different characteristics and emphases (Flores, 2012). In general, in the in-ternational  literature  there  are  two  main  purposes  of  teacher evaluation that are put forward. On the one hand, teacher evalua-tion  should  be  formative  and  stimulate  teachers’  professional
*  Corresponding author. Tel.: þ32 3 265 4526; fax: þ32 3 265 4626.
E-mail  addresses:  eva.delvaux@ua.ac.be,  evadelvaux@telenet.be  (E.  Delvaux), jan.vanhoof@ua.ac.be   (J.   Vanhoof),   melissa.tuytens@ugent.be   (M.   Tuytens), eva.vekeman@ugent.be    (E.    Vekeman),    geert.devos@ugent.be    (G.    Devos), peter.vanpetegem@ua.ac.be (P. Van Petegem).
development and on the other hand, teacher evaluation can also be used  in  a  more  summative  manner,  namely  in  order  to  hold teachers accountable for their performance (e.g. Avalos & Assael, 2006; Stronge, 2006;). More and more, researchers are convinced that teacher evaluation should commit to both of these purposes (Colby, Bradshaw, & Joyner, 2002; Stronge,1995). More speciﬁcally, teacher evaluation systems canplayan important role in improving teacher competency. In this way, they are relevant to both the quality of education and the achievement of students (Ovando, 2001; Wright, Horn, & Sanders, 1997). By stimulating the profes-sionaldevelopmentof teachers, teacherevaluation systemshavean indirect inﬂuence on the results of students (Danielson & McGreal, 2000; Robinson, Lloyd, & Rowe, 2008). Professional development is therefore an important topic in the effectiveness of an evaluation system for teachers (Stronge & Tucker, 2003). Nonetheless, there is  also  a  general  skepticism  about  the  effectiveness  of  teacher
 
0742-051X/$ e see front matter   2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2013.06.011
 
2                                                                            E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11
 
evaluation. One of the issues often raised is the lack of alignment between teacher evaluation and teachers’ professional develop-ment in schools (Frase & Streshly, 1994). This has been an inter-national  concern  as  is  demonstrated  by  the  focus  on  the possibilities of teacher evaluation as a tie between teacher quality and student achievement in two international large-scale OECD studies: ‘Evaluating and rewarding the quality of teachers: Inter-national practices’ (OECD, 2009a) and ‘Creating effective teaching and  learning  environments:  First  results  from  TALIS’  (OECD, 2009b).  Both  of  these  studies  emphasize  the  importance  of improvement  plans  that  identify  areas  in  which  professional development is needed for the teacher as a result of teacher eval-uation.  Hence,  the  OECD  studies  conﬁrm  the  appearance  of formative teacher evaluation in many countries around the world (e.g. Australia and Mexico). However, these studies also conﬁrm the need to further investigate the effectiveness of formative teacher evaluation which is the focus of our study that took place in Flan-ders (Belgium). As is demonstrated, the impact of teacher evalua-tions on professional development is questioned internationally. In this regard, many authors emphasize the importance of inﬂuencing factors,  such  as  useful  feedback,  leadership  characteristics  and purposes of evaluation (Tuytens, & Devos, 2011; Colby et al., 2002; Davis, Ellet, & Annunziata, 2002; Frase & Streshly, 1994).Therefore in this study, school leadership characteristics and features of the evaluation  system  will  be  taken  into  account.  First,  related  to leadership characteristics, Wahlstrom and Louis (2008) argue that the school leader is responsible to ensure the quality of teachers’ work. Hence, the school leader should be capable of providing constructive feedback to teachers. In this regard, the responsibility of the teacher evaluation process in particular rests with the school leader. Davis et al. (2002) even argue that an outstanding teacher evaluation system is of little meaning if the school leader is not supportive. In this regard, research is needed to identify which leadership characteristics might inﬂuence these challenges in a positive way (Coburn, 2005; Ovando & Ramirez, 2007; Sinnema & Robinson, 2007). Secondly, related to features of teacher evalua-tion systems, Kyriakides and Demetriou (2007) stated the devel-opment of avalid teacher evaluation system is problematic in many educational systems. This problem could be traced back to the lack of  empirical  evidence  regarding  the  speciﬁc  characteristics  of effective teacher evaluation systems. Milanowski and Heneman (2001) found only three studies which provide an evaluation of a newly-implemented standards-based teacher evaluation system. Our study wants to contribute to the literature in this regard.
In  Flanders  (Belgium),  a  new  teacher  evaluation  policy  was implemented in 2007 in secondary schools. Traditionally, teacher evaluation was not performed on a regular basis in Flemish sec-ondary education (Devos, Verhoeven, Stassen, & Warmoes, 2004). The new teacher evaluation system, which is put forward by the policy, shows both formative and summative aspects in line with international  trends.  The  evaluation  system  obliges  schools  to conduct performance and evaluation interviews with each teacher every four years. The four year period starts with the appointment of an evaluator. The evaluator is a superior in rank to the teacher (e.g. the school principal). Next, the performance criteria are stip-ulated in an individual job description per teacher that functions as a basis of the evaluation system. During the period of four years, a teacher  has  to  have  at  least  one  performance  interview  or  a formativefeedbackconversationwith his/herevaluator. During this conversation, the teacher gets feedback about his/her performance and on how to improve this performance. The four year evaluation period is ended with an evaluation interview or summative eval-uation conference of the teacher with his/her evaluator. After this summative evaluation conference, an evaluation report is made up by the evaluator in which he or she stipulates the ﬁnal conclusion.
This can be ‘sufﬁcient’ or ‘insufﬁcient’. In case of a ﬁnal conclusion ‘insufﬁcient’, a teacher has the right to appeal. Also, when a deﬁnite conclusion ‘insufﬁcient’ is conﬁrmed, the teacher has to receive a second  formal  evaluation within  the  next  year.  In  case  of  two ‘insufﬁcient’  conclusions  in  a  row,  a  teacher  can  be  dismissed. However, the Flemish teacher evaluation policy stresses that this should only take place in exceptional cases and the ﬁrst objective of the policy is formative teacher evaluation to improve teaching in Flemish schools (Flemish Ministry of Education, 2007).
In this regard, we observe in Flanders a policy that ﬁts the broader  international  trend  of  combining  both  formative  and summative purposes of teacher evaluation. As mentioned above, there is a lot of skepticism in international literature on the pos-sibilities of teacher evaluation to actually contribute to school and teacher  improvement  in  general.  Therefore,  this  study  aims  at contributing to ﬁll this research gap by identifying inﬂuential var-iables  for  professional  development  as  a  teacher  evaluation outcome from a teachers’ perspective. Considering the context of this study, we can, based on the international research literature, identify critical components of the teacher evaluation system or inﬂuencing leadership factors for teachers’ professional develop-ment.Thesewill be discussed inthe theoretical framework which is speciﬁed in the next paragraph.
2.  Theoretical framework
Our theoretical framework consists of several elements which have been identiﬁed in the research literature as inﬂuential for good teacher evaluation (i.e.  teacher evaluation that stimulates teachers to improve or develop professionally). A ﬁrst critical factor is the purpose of an evaluation system. There is agreement among several authors that teacher evaluation needs to serve a double cause:  on  the  one  hand  accountability and  on  the  other hand improvement (e.g. Colby et al., 2002; Stronge, 2006). In this regard, it is important to notice that a teacher evaluation system that is establishedtomainlymotivateteachers will have adifferentimpact on professional development than a teacher evaluation system that mainly aims to hold teachers accountable (Conly & Glasman, 2008; Stronge, 2006). Additionally, principals’ leadership features can be an  inﬂuencing  factor in  the  evaluation  of  teachers  (Tuytens,  & Devos, 2010). Principals can use teacher evaluation as a catalyst for  the  improvement  of  teaching  and  instruction  (Davis  et  al., 2002).  According  to  Marks  and  Printy  (2003),  both  trans-formational  and  instructional  leadership  are  important  for  the improvement of the behaviorand instructional practice of teachers. A principal’s positive or negative attitude toward teacher evalua-tions can have an impact on the effects of a teacher evaluation system (Peterson & Peterson, 2006). Other inﬂuencing features of the evaluation system are the fairness of the evaluation system, the clarity of evaluation criteria and purposes and the satisfaction of teachers  with  their  performance  and  evaluation  interviews (Tuytens & Devos, 2009; Giles & Mossholder, 1990). We will ﬁrst discuss these elements and their importance for teacherevaluation. Secondly, wewill focus onprofessional development as anoutcome of teacher evaluation.
2.1.  Purposes of evaluation
There  are  many  reasons  to  evaluate  teachers:  reassuring teachers that they are doing good work, informing audiences (like parents) of teacher performance, or informing personnel decisions (such as promotion or tenure) (Peterson & Peterson, 2006). The two most cited purposes of  teacher evaluation in the literature are accountability and professional development or summative and formative purposes (Isoré, 2009; Stronge, 2006).
 
E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11	3
 

 
Schools  are  frequently  confronted  with  the  pressure  of accountability and responsibility to ensure the quality of education (Vanhoof, & Van Petegem, 2010; Guskey, 2000). Summative evalu-ation attempts to measure the quality of education and, in the case of  teacher  evaluations,  to  evaluate  the  quality  of  the  teacher’s performance (Isoré, 2009). Common summative purposes are the dismissal of ineffective teachers, the promotion of teachers, tenure and sanctioning (Menuey, 2005;OECD, 2009c; Santiago, Rosevaere, van Amselsvoort, & Manzi, 2009).
Formative purposes of evaluation concern the improvement of teachers’ performance or the professional development of teachers. In  contrast  with  the  summative  purposes  of  evaluation,  which focus  on  judging  the  performance  of  the  individual  teacher (assessment of teaching), the purpose of formative evaluation is to improve the actual practice (assessment for teaching) (Isoré, 2009; Stronge, 2006). Formative and summative purposes of evaluation are often in conﬂict. Formative evaluation requires teachers to be open, while summative evaluation hinders openness because the outcomes  of  summative  evaluation  can  have  signiﬁcant  conse-quences for teachers’ careers (Gordon, 2006; OECD, 2009c). In fact, an evaluation system that is based on fear of sanctions is unlikely to contribute  to  improving  teaching  and  instruction  (Conley  & Glasman, 2008). In practice, evaluation systems seldom focus on both purposes. Mostly, they combine accountability and profes-sional development purposes (Avalos & Assael, 2006; Isoré, 2009). 2.2.  Features of the evaluation system
The features of the evaluation system are important factors in accomplishing  the  actual  improvement  of  teacher  performance (Tuytens  &  Devos,  2012).  In  this  study,  we  will  focus  on  three important features of the evaluation system: the clarity of purposes and evaluation criteria, perceived fairness of the evaluation system andteachersatisfactionwithperformanceandevaluationinterviews. 2.2.1.  Clarity of purposes and criteria of the evaluation system
The clarity of evaluation purposes and criteria is important to motivate teachers and to clarify what is expected from them (Kelly, Ang, Chong, & Hu, 2008). Earlier research, however, shows that evaluation criteria and purposes are not always clear or transparent (Gratton, 2004; OECD, 2009b). This lack of transparency can result in teachers’ negative attitudes and distrust toward the evaluation system and concern as to how they will be assessed (Gratton, 2004; Mo, Conners, & McCormick, 1998; Stronge & Tucker, 1999). 2.2.2.  Perceived fairness of the evaluation system
Negative reactions toward an evaluation are often related to a lack  of  fairness,  justice  and  accuracy  of  the  evaluation  system (Santiago et al., 2009). The perceived fairness of the evaluation system is related to the acceptance of an evaluation system (Colby et al., 2002;  Santiago  et  al.,  2009;  Stronge  &  Tucker,  1999).  The perceived fairness is related to procedural and distributive justice aspects of an evaluation system. Procedural justice concerns the different components of the procedure of evaluation, such as the attribution of an evaluator, the way in which evaluation criteria are established and the existence of and the reactions toward an appeal procedure  (Heneman  &  Milanowski,  2003;  Kelly  et  al.,  2008; Thurston & McNall, 2010). Distributive justice concerns the un-derstanding that teachers’ received assessment is in line with their performance (Kelly et al., 2008; Thurston & McNall, 2010). 2.2.3.  Teacher satisfaction with performance and evaluation
interviews
The satisfaction of teachers with their performance and evalu-ation interviews plays an important role in the evaluation process
because it stimulates the acceptance and use of the evaluation system (Keeping & Levy, 2000). Teachers’ satisfaction with their performance and evaluation interviews concerns the relationship between the evaluator and the teacher, the credibility of the eval-uator and the utility of the feedback.
The evaluator has a key role in the process of evaluation. The evaluator is the one who leads the performance and evaluation interviews. The relationship between the evaluator and the teacher is therefore a critical factor for teachers’ satisfaction with the in-terviews and for the effectiveness of an evaluation system. In the case of a positive relationship, teachers perceive the evaluation as a constructive process, they are more open to feedback and they are more willing to act upon the outcomes of evaluation (Chow, Wong, Yeung, & Mo, 2002; Kelly et al., 2008; Mo et al., 1998).
The credibility of the evaluator is also a critical factor. If teachers do not consider their evaluator competent, they fear receiving an undeserved assessment (Milanowski & Heneman, 2001). A credible evaluator 1) has the required competency to evaluate teachers, 2) has considerable experience in teaching, 3) is familiar with the subject of the teacher and 4) has enough opportunities to observe and follow-up with the teacher (Chow et al., 2002; Milanowski & Heneman, 2001; Mo et al., 1998).
Research also indicates that the utility of feedback is important for  the  success  and  effectiveness  of  the  evaluation  process, particularly in the improvement of performance and the devel-opment of teachers (Cawley, Keeping, & Levy, 1998; Heneman & Milanowski,  2003;  Tuytens,  &  Devos,  2011).  Useful  feedback means  immediate,  clear,  frequent,  speciﬁc  and  non-penalizing feedback  that  gives  suggestions  to  improve  teachers’  perfor-mance (Mo et al., 1998). In reality, teachers sometimes experience a lack of good and useful feedback, which inﬂuences the perceived utility of the evaluation procedure (Heneman & Milanowski, 2003; Keeping & Levy, 2000).
2.3.  Leadership characteristics
The importance of the characteristics of the school leader in improving learning and instruction and implementing an effective teacher evaluation policy is mentioned in the literature (Bass,1990; Bigman & Reavis, 2001; Davis et al., 2002). Transformational and instructional leadership are two styles of leadership that have an impact  on  the  improvement  of  the  behavior  and  instructional practices of teachers (Hallinger, 2003; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2005; Robinson et al., 2008).
The task of the transformational leader is to motivate and unite the staff under the same goals (Geijsel, Sleeger, Stoel, & Krüger, 2008; Hallinger, 2003; Kelchtermans & Piot, 2010, Leithwood & Jantzi, 2005). According to Leithwood (1992), a transformational leader strives for three objectives: 1) to help staff members develop and preserve a cooperative and professional school culture, 2) to promote the development of teachers and 3) to solve problems with the teachers in an efﬁcient way.
Instructional leaders want to establish and promote instructional improvementwithinschools(Heck,Marcoulides, & Glasman,1989). The principal is seen as an important source of educational exper-tise (Barth, 1986). Hallinger (2000) suggested three domains of instructional leadership: 1) deﬁning the academic school mission, 2) creating a positive learning climate and 3) managing the school’s instructional  program.  Within  the  scope  of  teacher  evaluation, instructional leadership activities aim to improve the instructional capacity of teachers (Ovando & Ramirez, 2007).
Additionally, the attitude of the school leader plays an impor-tant role in policymaking (Fullan, 2001). Therefore, the attitude of the principal toward the evaluation system, or how positively or negatively the principal stands toward the evaluation system in his
 
4                                                                            E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11
 
school (Petty & Wegener, 1998), is related to professional devel-opment (Peterson & Peterson, 2006).
2.4.  Relationship with professional development
Professional  development  concerns  the  formal  and  informal learning opportunities that deepen and extend teachers’ profes-sional competencies, including knowledge, beliefs, motivation and self-regulatory  skills  (Richter,  Kunter,  Klussmann,  Lüdtke,  & Baumert, 2011). Professional development is an important focus in the process of teacher evaluation because it inﬂuences student learning (Stronge & Tucker, 2003). Some authors report evidence that a teacher evaluation system has an impact on the professional development of teachers, such as teachers’ participation in addi-tional workshops and training (Milanowski & Kimball, 2003; OECD, 2005; Peterson & Peterson, 2006). As a result of the evaluation system, teachers may have more opportunities for professional development activities (OECD, 2009b). Tuytens and Devos (2011) found,  for  example,  that  after  performance  or  evaluation  in-terviews, teachers engage in more professional development ac-tivities. The evaluation system for teachers can also lead to an orientation toward growth in teaching (Tang & Chow, 2007), an enhancement of the teachers’ professional knowledge concerning their subject ﬁeld and the corresponding instructional practices (OECD, 2009b; Tang & Chow, 2007), greater reﬂection on their behavior as a teacher and more experimentation or application of new ideas (Heneman & Milanowski, 2003; Kwakman, 2003). A training or development plan for the teacher to improve teaching and instruction can also be an outcome of  teacher evaluations (OECD, 2009b).Finally, as a resultof the evaluationsystem, teachers indicate that they actually changed their behavior in the classroom (OECD,  2009b).  Earlier  research  found  that  teachers  tried  to improve their lessons, their classroom management and students test  scores  (Heneman  &  Milanowski,  2003;  Isoré,  2009;  OECD, 2009b).
Not all literature, however, conﬁrms the positive inﬂuence of the teacher evaluation system on professional development. The link between professional development and the evaluation system is not always clear and the evaluation process can be insufﬁcient in improving  teacher  performance  (Isoré,  2009;  Milanowski  & Kimball, 2003). This lack of impact on professional development is often a consequence of deﬁcient evaluation systems with, for example, a lack of good feedback, no link between the evaluation and classroom practice, an incompatibility between formative and summative purposes, or a lack of time (Frase & Streshly, 1994; Tucker, 1997).
In this study, we conceptualize teachers’ professional develop-ment as reﬂective learning (e.g. experimentation, reﬂective prac-tice)  which  the  teacher  undertakes  in  his/her  practice.  Put differently, we see professional development as an outcome of teacher evaluation in line with a situated cognitive perspective on learning:  i.e.  teacher  learning  is  a  constructive,  socially  and culturally situated process that takes place within the school (e.g. Geijsel et al., 2008; Kwakman, 2003). Because reﬂective learning is a difﬁcult process to actually observe, we also want to clarify that we measure the intent to undertake professional development (i.e. reﬂective learning) as it is perceived by the teacher him/herself instead  of  the  actual participation in professional  development activities. We argue the perception of the teacher is crucial for the actual behavior of the teacher. Avalos (2011) concluded in her re-view of the literature on professional development that teacher reﬂection in the form of analysis of needs, problems, change pro-cesses, beliefs is assumed to contribute to teachers’ professional development. This is also in line with the work of Ilgen, Fisher, and Taylor  (1979)  who  demonstrate  how  the  relationship  between
receiving feedback (e.g. during teacher evaluation procedures) and responding to this feedback is not straightforward. They point out when the teacher processes feedback there are several inﬂuential factors that might stimulate or constrain the teacher. We already discussed  these  potentially  inﬂuencing  factors  (e.g.  leadership, teacher evaluation system characteristics). These factors inﬂuence the teachers’ intent to respond to the feedback by engaging in professional  development  (e.g.  reﬂective  learning).  Hence,  it  is important to not only look at the actual behavioral change of the teacher, but to also verify the willingness of the teacher to respond to the feedback (Ilgen et al.,1979). In this regard, we might see that teachers have good reasons to choose notto respond to feedback by engaging in professional development. Therefore, we contemplate that, while professional development might be a desired outcome of teacherevaluation, there is a need to study underlying inﬂuences on the choice of the teacher to actually engage in professional development or not.
3.  Purpose of study
In earlier research, the inﬂuence of school leadership (Davis et al., 2002; Tuytens, & Devos, 2011), the purposes of evaluation (Mo et al.,1998) and the features of the evaluation system (Keeping & Levy, 2000) were investigated as isolated factors. In this study, we integrate the different factors in one analytical model. Fig. 1 gives an overview of the conceptual model of this study.
This study attempts to answer the following research questions: (1) What is the impact of the teacher evaluation system on pro-
fessional development from a teachers’ perspective?
(2) Which of the components of the evaluation system (i.e., pur-
pose  of  the  evaluation,  clarity  of  the  purpose  and  criteria,
perceived fairness, satisfaction with the interviews, leadership
characteristics) inﬂuences the effects of the evaluation system
on professional development from a teachers’ perspective? In
addition, what is the impact of each of these components? 4.  Method
To answer the proposed research questions qualitative as well quantitative research methods could be used. In this study, we opted for a quantitative approach in which we used a large-scale survey  to  make  generalizable  statements  about  the  evaluation system in Flanders. As a large and representative sample of schools and teachers was a critical condition for this type of research, we paid  sufﬁcient  attention  to  the  sampling  of  the  schools  and
Purposes of evaluation
- Formative evaluation
- Summative evaluation
Features of the evaluation systemEffects on professional 
  
Features of the evaluation system
-- Clarity t  of f purposes and criteria
Clari y o  purposes and criteria
-- Perceived i     fairness
Perce ved fairness
development
-- Satisfaction i    with t  the t   interviews
Satisfact on wi h he interviews
Relation evaluator lteacher
Relation eva uator teacher
R
Credibility oof f tthe evaluator
Credibility     he evaluator
C
Utility of feedback
Leadership characteristics 
- Transformational leadership
- Instructional leadership
- Attitude of the principal
Fig. 1.  Conceptual model.
 
E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11	5
 

 
teachers. In this method section we ﬁrst describe the content and the validity of the questionnaire. Next we describe the sample of the participating schools and teachers. Finally, we discuss the data analyses that were performed to answer the research questions. 4.1.  Questionnaire
We used a questionnaire to collect data concerning the teacher evaluation system in the school. Most of the questionnaires’ scales were based on existing instruments. When validated scales were not  available,  new  scales  were  developed  and  tested.  For  the development of the scales, we used the literature and interviews with principals and teachers. The developed scales were tested bya small sample of teachers.
Table 1 summarizes the following characteristics of the mea-surement  scales:  number  of  items,  mean,  standard  deviation, Cronbach’s alpha, an example item and a reference to the source, if applicable. All items were 5-point Likert scales ranging from 1, strongly disagree, to 5, strongly agree. The exception to this rule is for the scales regarding formative and summative purpose of the evaluation system, where the Likert scale ranges from 1, very un-important, to 5, very important.
The Cronbach’s alpha scores of the included scales were range from .84 to .95 (see Table 1). This high Cronbach’s alpha’s indicates that the included scales were reliable and internally consistent. To measure the validity of the different scales we conducted conﬁr-matory factor analyses in R2.15.1 with the package lavaan 0.5-9 (Rosseel,  2012).  In  line  with  the  theoretical  framework,  four conﬁrmatory factor analyses were conducted: a two-factor analysis for the purposes of evaluation, a ﬁve factor analysis for the features
of the evaluation system, a three factor analysis for leadership characteristics and a one-factor analysis for the effect on profes-sional  development  from  a  teachers’  perspective.  We  used following ﬁt indicators to assess our model: the Tucker Lewis index (TLI), the comparative ﬁt index (CFI) and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA). For the TLI and the GFI a value .90 or greater indicates a good ﬁt. The RMSEA indicates a fair ﬁt if its value ranges between .05 and .08 (Browne & Cudeck, 1993). For some pairs of items we correlated the residuals. We did this for items with a shared method variance or measures which correlate with each other for other reasons than the underlying latent variable of interest. Yet, all of the items were clear indicators of the factor, so the correlation of the error terms of these items is accepted because they reﬂect intended features of the research design (Cole, Ciesla, & Steiger, 2007).
The ﬁrst conﬁrmatory factor analysis concerning ‘purposes of the  evaluation  system’  conﬁrms  the  two-factor  structure  with formative purposes and summative purposes as factor (c2
¼ 805.2, df ¼ 57, c2
/df ¼ 14.37, CFI ¼ .98, TLI ¼ .97, RMSEA .08). The factor analysis for ‘features of the evaluation system’ also conﬁrmed the proposed ﬁve factor structure with the factors clarity of purpose and criteria, perceived fairness, evaluatoreteacher relation, credi-bility of the evaluator and utility of feedback (c2
¼ 1874.86, df ¼ 56, c2
/df ¼ 26.32, CFI: .95, TLI: .94, RMSEA: .07). For leadership char-acteristics we also conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis with transformational leadership, instructional leadership and attitude of the principal as factors. The factor analysis conﬁrmed this three factor structure (c2                                        2
¼ 2258.09, df ¼ 201, c /df ¼ 11.23; CFI: .91, TLI: .90, RSMEA: .07). Finally the one-factor structure for effects on professional  development  was  conﬁrmed  by  the  conﬁrmatory
 
Table 1
Summary of the measurements scales.
 
NM	SD	a	Example item	References
 

 
Effects of the evaluation system						
Effect on professional development	9	2.96	.97	.95	Thanks to my interviews,	(Mo et al., 1998)
					I have a clear plan to develop	
					myself professionally.	
 

 
Purposes evaluation						
Formative purposes	7	4.05	.68	.88	Identifying the professional	(Kelly et al., 2008; Mo et al., 1998)
					needs of teachers.	
Summative purposes	6	2.77	.87	.84	Promoting the evaluated	(Kelly et al., 2008; Mo et al., 1998)
					teacher.	
 

 
Features of the evaluation system						
Clarity of criteria and purposes	5	3.51	.91	.88	I have a good understanding	(Iwanicki, 1982; Kelly et al., 2008)
					of the appraisal criteria.	
Fairness of the evaluation system	8	3.67	.86	.94	The appraisal criteria on	(Heneman & Milanowski, 2003;
					which I am evaluated are fair.	Kelly et al., 2008)
Satisfaction with the interviews						
Evaluatoreteacher relationship	3	4.17	.92	.94	During my performance and	(Kelly et al., 2008)
					evaluation interviews, I had a	
					good interpersonal relationship	
					with my evaluator.	
Credibility of the evaluator	3	3.75	1.01	.92	My evaluator was familiar with	(Chow et al., 2002; Kelly et al., 2008)
					the subject matter that I taught.	
Utility of the feedback	3	3.69	1.06	.86	I am satisﬁed with the feedback	(Heneman & Milanowski, 2003)
					I received during my interviews.	
 

 
Leadership characteristics						
Transformational leadership	8	3.60	.87	.91	The principal premises a long-term	(Hulpia, Devos, & Rosseel, 2009)
					vision.	
Instructional leadership	6	3.18	.91	.89	The principal promotes discussions	(Heck, 1992; Heck, Larsen, &
					on instructional issues.	Marcioulides, 1990)
Attitude of the principal	8	3.43	.87	.90	The principal promotes the	/
					evaluation system as an important	
					policy tool.	
 
6                                                                            E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11
 
factor   analysis   (c2                                         2
¼ 356.99,   df ¼ 24,   c /df ¼ 14.3;   CFI ¼ .98,      context variables (school size and experience of teachers) were TLI ¼ .97, RMSEA ¼ .08).                                                               categorical variables and were included in the analyses as dummy-
variables. For school size, we distinguished three categories: small, 4.2.  Sample                                                                               medium and large. The categories for experience are <5 years of
experience, 5   years of experience   20 and >20 years of experi-
Data were gathered from a representative sample of teachers      ence. The reference categories are medium schools and 5e20 years from 65 secondary schools (ISCED 2 and ISCED 3) in Flanders. 63.3%      of experience. The dependent variable of all analyses was the effect of the teachers responded to the questionnaire: 5163 teachers were      of  the  evaluation  system  on  professional  development  from  a asked to participate and 3163 ﬁlled in the questionnaire. Because      teachers’ perspective. The values of all independent variables were familiarity with the teacher evaluation system was necessary to      standardized.
make a reliable judgment on the whole teacher evaluation system,          Table 3 gives the correlation matrixof the included independent only the teachers who had already participated in a performance      and dependent variables. Most of the correlations are small to interview were included. A total of 1983 teachers already had a      moderate, some of them are large. As we will use regression ana-performance  interview  and  were  included  in  the  analyses.  On      lyses to answer the research questions, it is important that there is average, 30 teachers per school were included.                                no multicollinearity or dependence between the variables that will
The sample was stratiﬁed for school size, based on the number      be used as independent variables in the data analyses. The variance of staff members. The sample contained 21 small schools (<55 staff      of inﬂation factor (VIF) gives an indication of the multicollinearity members), 23 medium schools (55   staff members   90) and 21      between independent variables. A variance inﬂation factor of 5 or large  schools  (staff  members > 90).  Furthermore,  the  sample      smaller indicates that there is no problem of multicollinearity be-included 28.3% teachers (n ¼ 560) with less than 5 years of expe-      tween the different independent variables (Miles & Shevlin, 2003). rience in the school, 47.1% (n ¼ 930) with 5e20 years of experience      The VIF of the included independent variables ranges between 1.16 and 24.6% (n ¼ 486) with more than 20 years of experience. Other      and 3.70, indicating that there is no problem of multicollinearity. characteristics  of  the  participating  schools  and  teachers,  like      Evidence for the included variables as independent factors, was educational network, grade, type of education, gender, age, quali-      also found in the conﬁrmatory factor analyses.
ﬁcation, are summarized in Table 2.                                                   The gathered data have a hierarchical structure. The partici-
pating teachers are part of a greater organizational structure, a 4.3.  Data analysis                                                                       school. The intraclass correlation (the proportion of variance that is
explained  at  school  level)  for  the  dependent  variable  is  .095.
In the data analysis, we included the different aspects of the      Because of this interplay between the teachers and the school, we evaluation  system  (see  Table  1)  as  independent  variables.  The      used multilevel regression analyses (Heck & Scott, 2009).
We conducted multilevel regression analyses using MLWin 2.23 Table 2
(Rasbash, Charlton, Browne, Healy, & Cameron, 2011). We esti-Characteristics of the participating schools and teachers.
mated three different models. In the null model, only the depen-
Information schools and participants                              N                    %                 dent variable was included. In model 1, we added all of the context
School level                                                                                                          and independent variables. To create a parsimonious model, only
Educational network                                                                                               variables with an explanatory value for the model were included.
Community schools                                                          13               20.0%
This means that also non-signiﬁcant variables were included in the
Subsidized public schools                                                   4                 6.2%
ﬁnal model because they have an explanatory value for the model
Subsidized private schools                                                48               73.8%
and we want to control for these variables. Avariable was no longer
Gradea                                                                                                                                                                           included in the ﬁnal model if therewas not a statistically signiﬁcant
First grade (12e14 years)                                                 47               72.3%           decrease in model ﬁt or deviance after deleting this variable from
Second grade (14e16 years)                                             44               67.7%
model  1.  To  estimate  the  parameters,  we  used  the  Iterative
Third grade (16e18 years)                                                42               64.6%
Generalized Least Squares (IGLS) estimation. In the results section
we will only discuss the results of the null model and ﬁnal model.
Type of educationa
2
We  also  calculated  an  R   for  hierarchical  linear  models,  as
General education                                                            30               63.8%
2
Technical education                                                         31               63.3%           deﬁned by Snijders and Bosker (1999). The interpretation of this R
2                                                                      2
Vocational education                                                        33               66.0%           is different from the R  for a multiple regression analysis. The R  for
Artistic education                                                              3                 4.6%
a two-level hierarchical linear model included two parameters: one
that indicated the proportional reduction of error for predicting an
individual outcome (cf. at respondent level) and one that indicated
Respondent level
the proportional reduction of error for predicting a group mean (cf.
Gender
Women                                                                       1230               62.2%           at school level).
Men                                                                             748               37.8%
 
5.  Results
Age
<25 Year                                                                        94                 4.7%
The descriptive statistics of the included variables are listed in
25e39 Year                                                                   889               44.9%
40e59 Year                                                                   981               49.5%           Table  1.  The  mean  score  of  the  scale  “effects  on  professional
>60 Year                                                                        17                   .9%           development”, the dependent variable of this study, was slightly
smaller than the middle score of the scale. This ﬁnding indicates
Qualiﬁcations
that, on average, teachers perceive little effect of the evaluation
Upper secondary (ISCED3) with teacher degree                 191                 9.7%
system on their professional development. However the standard
Bachelor degree                                                           1157               58.8%
Master degree                                                               620               31.5%           deviation of this scale is high, indicating that there is a large vari-
a                                                                                                                                                                                       ation in perceived professional development.
In one secondary school there can be multiple grades or types of education. The
The mean of the scale “summative purposes” was lower than values in the table represents the amount of sample schools that provide a particular
grade or type of education.                                                                                        the middle score (M ¼ 2.77). On the contrary, the scale of formative
 
E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11	7
 
Table 3
Correlation matrix of the dependent and independent variables and variance inﬂation index.
 
1234567891011VIF
 
Dependent variable	
Effect on professional development (1)	1
 

 
Independent variables				
Formative purposes (2)	.33	1		1.33
Summative purposes (3)	.27	.34	1	1.16
Clarity of criteria and purposes (4)	.49	.36	.22          1	2.34
Fairness of the evaluation system (5)	.48	.40	.19	3.70
Evaluatoreteacher relationship (6)	.38	.35	.12	2.97
Credibility of the evaluator (7)	.48	.31	.15	2.55
Utility of the feedback (8)	.62	.39	.22	3.18
Transformational leadership (9)	.49	.38	.21            .54	2.85
Instructional leadership (10)	.45	.24	.19            .42	1.86
Attitude of the principal (11)	.54	.37	.21            .57	2.23
 

 
purposes had a high mean score (M ¼ 4.05). This ﬁnding indicates that  teachers  think  that  the  purpose  of  the  teacher evaluation system    is    development-oriented    rather    than    oriented toward controlling or sanctioning teachers. Another highlight is the high mean score (M ¼ 4.17) on the scale “evaluatoreteacher rela-tionship”. The standard deviations of all scales are rather high, indicating that teachers have a different perception of the charac-teristics of the evaluation system. Only for the formative purposes of the evaluation system was the standard deviation smaller, indi-cating that teachers are in greater agreement about this topic. Table 4 reports the results of the multilevel regression analyses with  the  effects  on  professional  development  as  a  dependent variable.
First, we calculated the null model. This model shows statistic signiﬁcant  variance  at  the  school  and  respondent  levels.  The intraclass correlation for this model was.095. This ﬁnding indicates that 9.5% of the difference between the teachers was related to the
respondents’ school afﬁliation. In the next model (model 1), we added the explanatory variables. Compared to the null model, the
inclusion of these explanatory variables resulted in a signiﬁcant
improvement of the model (c2
(14) ¼ 2506.90, p < .001).To ﬁnd a more  parsimonious  model,  we  excluded  variables  that  did  not cause any model improvement. The context variablesdmore than 20 years of experience, small schools and large schoolsdwere, for this reason, deleted in the ﬁnal model. The deviance of the resulting ﬁnal  model  was  not  statistically  signiﬁcant  different  from  the
deviance of model 1 (c2
(3) ¼ 6.57, p ¼ .087), which indicates that both models have the same explanatory value. Compared to the null model, the ﬁnal model explained, at the school level, 52% extra
variance in the effects on professional development from a teach-ers’ perspective. At the respondent level, the ﬁnal model explained 49% extra variance in the dependent variable in comparison with the null model. In the ﬁnal model, there were still statistically signiﬁcant differences at the respondent and school levels. A total
 
Table 4
Multilevel regression analyses with effects on professional development as dependent variable.
 
Null model		Model 1		Final model	
b	S.E.	b	S.E.	b	S.E.
 

 
Fixed effect						
Intercept	.017	(.046)	.052	(.048)	 .025	(.029)
Less than 5 years of experience (vs 5e20 years)			.189	(.044)***	.215	(.042)***
More than 20 years of experience (vs 5e20 years)			 .089	(.046)		
Small school (vs medium)			 .038	(.066)		
Large school (vs medium			 .101	(.061)		
Formative purposes			 .006	(.022)	 .004	(.022)
Summative purposes			.085	(.021)***	.085	(.021)***
Clarity of criteria and purposes			.075	(.030)*	.077	(.030)*
Fairness of the evaluation system			.029	(.036)	.022	(.035)
Evaluatoreteacher relationship			 .145	(.032)***	 .145	(.032)***
Credibility of the evaluator			.075	(.030)*	.077	(.030)*
Utility of the feedback			.376	(.034)***	.373	(.034)***
Transformational leadership			.058	(.033)	.057	(.033)
Instructional leadership			.112	(.027)***	.110	(.027)***
Attitude of the principal			.172	(.030)***	.177	(.030)***
 

 
Random effect						
School level	.097	(.024)***	.017	(.007)*	.019	(.008)*
Respondent level	.919	(.030)***	.467	(.018)***	.468	(.018)***
R2 school level					52%	
R2 respondent level					49%	
 

 
Model ﬁt			
 2LLL (deviance)	5544.085	3037.185	3043.757
 

 
ICC	.095	.035	.039
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001.			
 
8                                                                            E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11
 
of  3.9%  of  the  residual  variation  in  the  effects  on  professional development weresituated at the school level. The remaining 96.1% of the residual variation must be attributed to differences between teachers.
In the ﬁnal model, several variables had a statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the effects from the evaluation system on professional development.
Experience had a considerable impact on the perceived effects of professional development. Teachers with limited experience (i.e., less than 5 years) report greater effects (b ¼.215) on professional development than teachers with average experience (i.e., 5e20 years).
Perceived summative purposes had a small, signiﬁcant positive effect (b ¼ .085) on professional development. If teachers perceived that the evaluation system hasmoresummative purposes,theyalso reported  more  effects  on  their  professional  development.  The perceived formative purposes scale is not statistically signiﬁcant with respect to the effect on professional development.
After  controlling  for  the  remaining  variables,  the  perceived fairness of the evaluation system was not statistically signiﬁcant in relation  to  the  effects  on  professional  development.  The  other features of the evaluation system did play a role in the effects on teachers’  professional  development.  If  teachers  perceived  the criteria and purposes of the evaluation system as more clear, they also perceived greater effects (b ¼ .077) of the evaluation system on their professional development. This effect, however, was small. Additionally, the satisfaction of teachers with their interviews was important for the effects on professional development. Notably, if teachers found their relationship with their evaluator more satis-factory, they experienced lesser effects (b ¼ .145) on their pro-fessional development. When the evaluator was perceived as more credible,  teachers  experienced  greater  effects  (b ¼ .077)  of  the evaluation   system   on   their   professional   development.   The perceived utility of the feedback also played an important role. If teachers  found  the  feedback  from  the  interviews  more  useful (b ¼ .373),  they  also  reported  greater  effects  on  professional development.
Two leadership characteristics e instructional leadership and attitude of the principal toward the evaluation system e had a positive signiﬁcant effect on professional development. If teachers experienced  more  instructional  leadership  (b ¼ .110)  from  their principal, theyalso experienced a greater effect from the evaluation system on their professional development. Additionally, if teachers perceived  that  their  principal  had  a  more  positive  attitude toward the evaluation system (b ¼ .177), they reported greater ef-fects on professional development. When controlled for the other variables, transformational leadership had no statistically signiﬁ-cant effect.
6.  Conclusions and discussion
In general, teachers experience only limited effects of the eval-uation system on their professional development. However, the standard deviation of this scale is rather high, indicating that there is a large variation in the effects of the evaluation system on pro-fessional  development.  The  effects  teachers  perceive  from  the evaluation  system  on  their  professional  development  may  be related to different characteristics of the evaluation system. The results of this study show that limited teaching experience, useful feedback  and  a  positive attitude  of  the  principal  are the  most important characteristics of the evaluation system. These charac-teristics are positively relatedtooutcomes of the teacherevaluation system on professional development. Also other characteristics are related to professional development from a teachers’ perspective. In the following section we will discuss and link the results of this
study  to  the  research  literature  concerning  teacher  evaluation systems.
First, teachers with limited teaching experience (5 years of less), report considerablygreatereffects of the evaluation system on their professional development. A possible explanation for this ﬁnding is that these teachers have a greater need for professional develop-ment than their more-experienced colleagues. Evidence for this explanationcanbefoundin Huberman’s(1989) teachercareerstage model,wherethe phase of ‘discovery’ at the beginningof a teaching career is associated with a sharp learning curve and the following phase ‘stabilization’, which teachers enter after several years (3e5 years)  of  experience,  is  characterized  by  a  growing  sense  of instructional ‘mastery’. TALIS (OECD, 2009b) also found empirical evidence that less-experienced teachers are more engaged in pro-fessional development than more-experienced teachers. Teachers with limited experience also have more frequent performance or evaluation interviews and receive more guidance through such mechanisms as classroom visits and mentoring. As a consequence, they  may experience  greater effects  from  these  interviews.  An alternative explanation could be that more-experienced teachers have more job security or have obtained tenure. In the speciﬁc case of Flanders, teachers can reach an appointment with more job se-curity  after  a  minimum  of  three  school  years.  Because  of  this increased job security, more-experienced teachers could feel less obliged to undertake professional development activities. Second, the extent to which the evaluation system has formative purposes has no inﬂuence on the effect of the system on professional devel-opment. The low standard deviation for this scale indicates that there is little difference in the perceived formative purposes be-tween teachers, making it harder to ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant differences. Summative purposes of the evaluation system, however, have a small but signiﬁcant positive impact on the perceived pro-fessional development. Thus, if teachers ﬁnd that the evaluation systemhasmoresummativepurposes,they ﬁndthatthesystemhas a greater effect on their professional development. This ﬁnding is not in line with earlier research. Formative purposes of the evalua-tion system concern formative outcomes, such as teachers’ profes-sional development (Isoré, 2009; Stronge, 2006). If the purposes of an evaluation system focus more on professional development, one would expect greater effects on professional development or more formative outcomes (Chow et al., 2002). In contrast, summative purposes are more directed toward accountability and judgment (Isoré, 2009). Summative purposes, however, are often related to possible consequences and a fear of sanctions (Conly & Glasman, 2008). Therefore, it maybe that teachers feel more pressure to un-dertake professional development.
Third, four of the ﬁve features of the evaluation system inﬂuence the  perceived  effects  of  the  evaluation  system  on  professional development. The clarity of evaluation criteria and purposes has a small but statistically signiﬁcant impact on professional develop-ment. The perceived fairness of the evaluation system has no sta-tistically signiﬁcant impact on the effect of the evaluation system of teachers’ professional development. Finally, teachers’ satisfaction with the performance and evaluation sessions has an impact on professional  development.  First,  if  the  relationship  between teachers and their evaluators is perceived as more positive by the teachers, they experience fewer effects of the evaluation system on professional development. It is possible that teachers who have a more positive relationship with their evaluator feel less pressure to undertake  actions  after a  performance  or  evaluation  interview. Second, if the credibility of the evaluator is rated higher by the teachers, the teachers experience greater effects on their profes-sional development. This effect, however, is rather small. The effect of the utility of feedback is the most important of all included components. How useful teachers ﬁnd the feedback which they
 
E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11	9
 

 
received  during  their  performance  or  evaluation  interviews  is crucial to their professional development. The importance of the perceived utility of feedback conﬁrms the ﬁndings of Tuytens and Devos (2011) that perceived feedback utility has a positive inﬂu-enceon the professional learningactivities that teachers undertake.
Furthermore, leadership characteristics are related to the effects of the system on professional development. Instructional leader-ship by the principal is positively related to the effects on profes-sional development. This ﬁnding is in line with earlier research in which  principals’  instructional  leadership  activities,  within  the scope of a teacher evaluation system, were positively related with professional  development  activities  (Ovando  &  Ramirez,  2007; Tuytens & Devos, 2011). Additionally, a morepositive attitude of the principal toward the evaluation system is related to greater pro-fessional development. Transformational leadership, however, has no statistically signiﬁcant effect on professional development. Un-like instructional leadership, which focuses directly on instruction, transformational leadership is more focused on vision sharing and is therefore less directly related to professional development. This ﬁnding may explain the absence of a relationship with professional development. The effects of the evaluation system on professional development differ between schools. The included elements of the school’s evaluation system may explain an important part of the variance between schools. After controlling for the included ele-ments  of  the  evaluation  system,  4.5%  of  the  variance  between teachers is situated at the school level. This ﬁnding indicates that factors besides the included elements of the evaluation system have an impact on professional development caused by the eval-uation system. Previous research shows that other organizational factors also inﬂuence the professional development of teachers: for example, the school culture, the existence of a professional com-munity and the shared curriculum in the school (Avalos, 2011; Glazer  &  Hannaﬁn,  2006).  Further  research  might  explore  the relation between these organizational factors and the impact of a teacher evaluation system on professional development.
The present study has also some limitations. A ﬁrst limitation is that the study was conducted at the initiation of a new evaluation system in Flanders. The new evaluation system was still under development at the time; therefore, further research at a more developed stage of the evaluation system is desirable.
Another limitation is that the effects on professional develop-ment were measured using a self-report questionnaire. Teachers report their intentions to respond to the feedback by engaging in professional development (i.e. reﬂective learning). In this study we couldn’t  measure  the  actual  behavior  of  teachers’  professional development, but we wanted to identify the underlying inﬂuences on the choice of the teachers to actually engage in professional development or not. This intended response or reﬂective learning has been identiﬁed as an important inﬂuencing factor for the actual change in behavior of teachers (Ilgen et al., 1979). However the actual behavior in professional development activities could be an interesting angle for further research. An objective way to measure changes in professional development activities would be to mea-sure  the  professional  development activities  undertaken before and after the performance interview.
In this study, we opted for a quantitative approach as we wanted to make generalizable statements about the evaluation system in Flanders.However,aqualitativeapproachcouldalsobeinterestingto gain insight into the effectiveness and underlying processes of a teacher evaluation system. In-depth case studies with techniques like semi-structured interviews with critical actors (like the evalu-ator and teachers) and document analyses could be an interesting approach.Throughthedescriptionofcaseswith ‘goodpractices’,one can gain more insight into the processes that are crucial for an effective teacher evaluation system. A qualitative follow-up study
could also further explore interesting ﬁndings like the link between summative purposes and the effectiveness of the evaluation system or the negative relation between theteachereevaluator relationship andtheeffectoftheevaluationsystemonprofessionaldevelopment.
Furthermore this study has some implications for the develop-ment of theory regarding the effectiveness of teacher evaluation systems.  In  this  study  we  searched  for  the  direct  inﬂuence  of componentsof the evaluation system onprofessional development. It is possible, however, that some variables have an indirect inﬂu-ence on professional development. For further theory development it is important that also the indirect inﬂuences of the different characteristics  of  the  evaluation  system  are  explored.  A  ﬁrst attempt to explore these indirect inﬂuences can be found in earlier research, where it was discovered that transformational leadership and perceived fairness (or procedural justice) have a statistically signiﬁcant  inﬂuence  on  the  utility  of  feedback.  This  utility  of feedback subsequently has a statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence on professional development activities (Tuytens & Devos, 2011, 2012). To test this hypothesis, further research in which the indirect in-ﬂuence of the independent variables on professional development is examined is necessary.
Our  ﬁndings  can  also  inspire  the  future  design  of  effective evaluation systems that stimulate teachers’ professional develop-ment. This study indicates success factors in the implementation and execution of evaluation systems, like useful feedback, credi-bility of the evaluator, instructional leadership and a positive atti-tude of the principal. These factors emphasize the central role of the evaluator, in most cases the principal of the school, in the effec-tiveness  of  a  teacher  evaluation  system.  Especially  within  the context of Flanders, where schools enjoy a high degree of auton-omy, the role of the principal in the implementation of policies, like theteacherevaluationsystem,is crucial.Aprincipalwithgoodskills to conduct teacher performance and evaluation interviews can be seen as a necessary condition for effective evaluations systems.
However, this study also indicates some limitations of teacher evaluation  systems.  The  current  teacher  evaluation  system  in Flanders was reported to be more effective for the professional development of teachers with limited experience. But stimulating the professional development of more-experienced teachers is also important.  An  improvement  of  the  current  teacher  evaluation system  could  be  a  system  that  encourages  more-experienced teachers to engage more in professional development activities. A suggestion could be that the activities for professional develop-ment are an explicit topic in a performance or evaluation interview. Another limitation of the present teacher evaluation is the positive correlation between summative purposes and the effect on pro-fessional development. Teachers should notonlywant to undertake professional development because of pressure or accountability reasons but also because of a positive willingness to engage in professional development. In the further development of teacher evaluation systems one should pay attention to these issues.
References
Avalos, B. (2011). Teacher professional development in “teaching and teacher ed-
ucation” over ten years. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27(10), 10e20. Avalos, B., & Assael, J. (2006). Moving from resistance to agreement: the case of the
Chilean  teacher  performance  evaluation.  International  Journal  of  Educational
Research, 45(4e5), 254e266.
Barth, R. (1986). On sheep and goats and school reform. Phi Delta Kappan, 68(4),
293e296.
Bass, B. M. (1990). From transactional leadership to transformational leadership e
learning to share the vision. Organizational Dynamics, 18(3), 19e31.
Bigman,  G.,  &  Reavis,  C.  (2001).  Preferred  leadership  frames  of  principals  in
implementing a state-wide teacher appraisal system. Contemporary Education,
72(2), 52e56.
Browne, M. W., & Cudeck, R. (1993). Alternative ways of assessing model ﬁt. Sage
Focus Editions, 154,136.
 
10                                                                           E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11
 
Cawley, B. D., Keeping, L. M., & Levy, P. E. (1998). Participation in the performance
appraisal  process and employee reactions: a meta-analytical review of ﬁeld
investigations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83(4), 615e633.
Chow, A. P. Y., Wong, E. K. P., Yeung, A. S., & Mo, K. W. (2002). Teachers’ perceptions
of appraisereappraisee relationships. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Educa-
tion, 16(2), 85e101.
Coburn, C. E. (2005). Shaping teacher sensemaking: school leaders and the enact-
ment of reading policy. Educational Policy, 19(3), 476e509.
Colby, S. A., Bradshaw, L. K., & Joyner, R. L. (2002). Teacher evaluation: A review of the
literature. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, New Orleans.
Cole, D. A., Ceisla, J. A., & Stieger, J. H. (2007). The insidious effects of failing to
include design-driven correlated residuals in latent-variable covariance struc-
ture analysis. Psychological Methods, 12(4), 381.
Conley, S., & Glasman, N. (2008). Fear, the school organisation, and teacher evalu-
ation. Educational Policy, 22(1), 63e85.
Danielson, C., & McGreal, T. L. (2000). Teacher evaluation. To enhance professional
practice.   Alexandria,   VA:   Association   for   Supervision   and   Curriculum
Development.
Davis, D. R., Ellett, C. D., & Annunziata, J. (2002). Teacher evaluation, leadership
and learning organizations. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 16(4),
52e57.
Devos, G, Verhoeven, J., Stassen, K, & Warmoes, V. Personeelsbeleid in Vlaamse
scholen,  [Personnel  policy  in  Flemish  schools],  2004,  Mechelen:  Wolters
Plantyn.
Flemish Ministry of Education. (2007). Decreethoudendedringendemaatregelen met
betrekking tot functiebeschrijvingen en evaluatie in het onderwijs [Decree con-
cerning urgent regulations regarding job descriptions and evaluation in education].
Bruxelles.
Flores, M. A. (2012). The implementation of a new policy on teacher appraisal in
Portugal:  how  do  teachers  experience  it  at  school?  Educational  Assessment,
Evaluation and Accountability, 24(4), 351e368.
Frase, L. E., & Streshly, W. (1994). Lack of accuracy, feedback, and commitment in
teacher evaluation. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 1,47 57.
e Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change. New York, N.Y.: Teachers
College.
Geijsel, F., Sleegers, P., Stoel, R., & Krüger, M. (2008). The effect of teacher psycho-
logical, school organizational and leadership factors on teachers’ professional
learning in Dutch schools. The Elementary School Journal, 109(4), 406e427.
Giles, W. F., &  Mossholder, K. W. (1990). Employee reactions to contextual  and
session components  of performance appraisal. Journal of Applied Psychology,
75(4), 371e377.
Glazer, E. M., & Hannaﬁn, M. J. (2006). The collaborative apprenticeship model:
situated professional development within school settings. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 22(2), 179e193.
Gordon,  S.  P.  (2006).  Teacher  evaluation  and  professional  development.  In
J.  H.  Stronge  (Ed.),  Evaluating  teaching  (pp.  268e290).  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:
Corwin Press.
Gratton, R. (2004). Teacher appraisal: a lesson on confusion over purpose. Inter-
national Journal of Educational Management, 18(5), 292e296.
Guskey, T. R. (2000). Evaluating professional development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Cor-
win Press.
Hallinger, P. (2000). A review of two decades of research on the principalship using the
principal instructional management rating scale. Paper presented at the annual
meeting   of   the   American   Educational   Research   Association,   Seattle,
Washington.
Hallinger,  P.  (2003).  Leading  educational  change:  reﬂections  on  the  practice  of
instructional and transformational leadership. Cambridge Journal of Education,
33(3), 329e351.
Heck, R., Marcoulides, G., & Glasman, N. (1989). The application of causal modeling
techniques to administrative decision making: the case of teacher allocation.
Educational Administration Quarterly, 25(3), 253e267.
Heck, R. H. (1992).  Principals’ instructional leadership and school performance:
implications for policy development. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
14(1), 21e34.
Heck, R. H., Larsen, T. J., & Marcoulides, G. A. (1990). Instructional leadership and
school achievement: validation of a causal model. Educational Administration
Quarterly, 26(2), 94e125.
Heck, R. H., & Scott, L. T. (2009). An introduction to multilevel modeling techniques
(2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Heneman, H. G., & Milanowski, A. T. (2003). Continuing assessment of teacher re-
action  to  a  standards-based  teacher  evaluation  system.  Journal  of  Personnel
Evaluation in Education, 17(2), 173e195.
Huberman, M. (1989). On teachers’ careers: once over lightly, with a broad brush.
International Journal of Educational Research, 13(4), 314e466.
Hulpia, H., Devos, G., & Rosseel, Y. (2009). Development and validation of scores on
distributed leadership inventory. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
69(6), 1013e1034.
Ilgen, D. R., Fisher, C. D., & Taylor, M. S. (1979). Consequences of individual feedback
on behavior in organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64(4), 349e371. Isoré,  M.  (2009).  Teacher  evaluation:  Current  practices  in  OECD  countries  and  a
literature review. OECD education working paper.
Iwanicki,  E.  F.  (1982).  Development  and  validation  of  teacher  evaluation  needs
identiﬁcation   survey.   Educational   and   Psychological   Measurement,   42(1),
265e274.
Keeping, L. M., & Levy, P. E. (2000). Performance appraisal reactions: measurement,
modeling and method bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(5), 708e723.
Kelchtermans, G., & Piot, L. (2010). Schoolleiderschap aangekaart en in kaart gebracht.
Leuven/Den Haag: Acco.
Kelly, K. O., Ang, S. Y. A., Chong, W. L., & Hu, W. S. (2008). Teacher appraisal and its
outcomes in Singapore primary schools. Journal of Educational Administration,
46(1), 39e54.
Kwakman,  K.  (2003).  Factors  affecting  teachers’  participation  in  professional
learning activities. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19,149 170.
e
Kyriakides, L., & Demetriou, D. (2007). Introducing a teacher evaluation system
based on teacher effectiveness research: an investigation of stakeholders’ per-
ceptions. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 20(1e2), 43e64.
Leithwood, K. (1992). The move toward transformational leadership. Educational
Leadership, 49(5), 8e12.
Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2005). A review of transformational school leadership
research 1996e2005. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 4(3), 177e199. Marks, H. M., & Printy, S. M. (2003). Principal leadership and school performance:
an  integration  of  transformational  and  instructional  leadership.  Educational
Administration Quarterly, 39(3), 370e397.
Menuey,  B.  P.  (2005).  Teachers’  perceptions  of  professional  incompetence  and
barriers to the dismissal process. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education,18,
309e325.
Milanowski, A., & Heneman, H. G., III (2001). Assessment of teacher reactions to a
standards-based teacher evaluation system: a pilot study. Journal of Personnel
Evaluation in Education, 15(3), 193e212.
Milanowski, A. T., & Kimball, S. (2003). The framework-based teacher performance
assessment systems in Cincinnati and Washoe. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of American Educational Finance Association, Orlando, FL.
Miles, J., & Shevlin, M. (2003). Applying regression & correlation: A guide for students
and researchers. London: Sage.
Mo, K. W., Conners, R., & McCormick, J. (1998). Teacher appraisal in Hong Kong self-
managing secondary schools: factors for effective practices. Journal of Personnel
Evaluation in Education, 12(1), 19e42.
OECD. (2005). Teachers matter. Attracting, developing and retaining effective teachers.
Paris: OECD.
OECD. (2009a). Creating effective teaching learning environments. First results from
TALIS. Paris: OECD.
OECD. (2009b). Teacher evaluation. A conceptual framework and examples of country
practices. Paris: OECD.
OECD.  (2009c).  Evaluating  and  rewarding  the  quality  of  teachers:  International
practices. Paris: OECD.
Ovando, M. N. (2001). Teachers’ perceptions of a learner-centered teacher evalua-
tion system. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 15(3), 213e231. Ovando, M. N., & Ramirez, A. (2007). Principals’ instructional leadership within a
teacher performance appraisal system: enhancing students’ academic success.
Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 20(1e2), 85e110.
Peterson, K. D., & Peterson, C. (2006). Effective teacher evaluation. Guide for princi-
pals. California: Corwin Press.
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Attitude change: multiple roles for persuasion
variables.  In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social
psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rasbash, J., Charlton, C., Browne, W. J., Healy, M., & Cameron, B. (2011). MLwiN.
Version 2.23. Centre for Multilevel Modelling, University of Bristol.
Richter,  D.,  Kunter,  M.,  Klusmann,  U.,  Lüdtke,  O.,  &  Baurnett,  J.  (2011).  Pro-
fessional   development   across   the   teaching   career:   teachers’   uptake   of
formal  and informal  learning opportunities. Teaching and Teacher Education,
27,116 126.
e
Robinson, V. M. J., Lloyd, C. A., & Rowe, K. J. (2008). The impact of leadership on
student outcomes: an analysis of the differential effects of leadership types
[Proceeding paper]. Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(5), 635e674.
Rosseel, Y. (2012). Lavaan: an R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of
Statistical Software, 48(2), 1e36.
Santiago, P., Roseveare, D., van Amelsvoort, G., & Manzi, J. (2009). Teacher evaluation
in Portugal: OECD review. OECD.
Sinnema,  C.  E.  L.,  &  Robinson,  V.  M.  J.  (2007).  The  leadership  of  teaching  and
learning: implications for teacher evaluation. Leadership and Policy in Schools,
6(4), 319e343.
Snijders, T., & Bosker, R. (1999). Multilevel analysis. An introduction to basic and
advanced multilevel modeling. London: Sage Publications.
Stronge, J. H. (1995). Balancing individual and institutional goals in educational
personnel evaluation: a conceptual framework. Studies in Educational Evalua-
tion, 21(2), 131e151.
Stronge, J. H. (2006). Evaluating teaching. A guide to current thinking and best prac-
tice. Thousand Oaks: Corwin Press.
Stronge, J. H., & Tucker, P. D. (1999). The politics of teacher evaluation: a case study
of new system design and implementation. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in
Education, 13(4), 339e359.
Stronge, J. H., & Tucker, P. D. (2003). Teacher evaluation. Assessing and improving
performance. Larchmont, NY: Eye on Education.
Tang, S. Y. F., & Chow, A. W. K. (2007). Communicating feedback in teaching practice
supervision  in  a  learning-oriented  ﬁeld  experience  assessment  framework.
Teaching and Teacher Education, 23, 1066e1085.
Thurston,   P.   W.,   &   McNall,   L.   (2010).   Justice   perceptions   of   perfor
mance  appraisal  practices.  Journal  of  Managerial  Psychology,  25(3e4),
201e228.
 
E. Delvaux et al. / Teaching and Teacher Education 36 (2013) 1e11	11
 
Tucker, P. D. (1997). Lake Wobegon: where all teachers are competent (or have we        Tuytens, M., & Devos, G. (2012). Importance of system and leadership in perfor-
come to terms with the problem of incompetent teachers?). Journal of Personnel              mance appraisal. Personnel Review, 41(6), 756e776.
Evaluation in Education, 11,103 126.                                                                     Vanhoof, J., & Van Petegem, P. (2010). Evaluating the quality of self-evaluations: the
e
Tuytens, M., & Devos, G. (2009). Teachers’ perception of the new teacher evaluation              (mis)match between internal and external meta-evaluation. Studies in Educa-
policy: a validity study of the policy characteristics scale. Teaching and Teacher              tion Evaluation, 36,20 26.
e
Education, 25(6), 924e930.                                                                                  Wahlstrom, K., & Louis, K. S. (2008). How teacher experience principal leadership: Tuytens, M., & Devos, G. (2010). The inﬂuence of school leadership on teachers’              the roles of professional community, trust, efﬁcacy, and shared responsibility.
perception of teacher evaluation policy. Education studies, 36(5), 521e536.                    Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(4), 458e495.
Tuytens, M., & Devos, G. (2011). Stimulating professional learning through teacher        Wright, S. P., Horn, S. P., & Sanders, W. L. (1997). Teacher and classroom effects on
evaluation: an impossible task for the school leader? Teaching and teacher ed-              student achievement: implications for teacher evaluation. Journal of Personnel
ucation, 27(5), 891e899.                                                                                            Evaluation in Education, 11(1), 47e67.

